Add transfer learning episode (#456)
carpentries-incubator/deep-learning-intro: episodes/5-transfer-learning.Rmd

---
title: "Transfer learning"
teaching: 20
exercises: 30
---

::: questions

> - How do I apply a pre-trained model to my data?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- How do I use a pre-trained model to my data?
```

:::

::: objectives

> - Apply a state-of-the-art pre-trained network on your own dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adapt a state-of-the-art pre-trained network to your own dataset
```

:::

## What is transfer learning?

> Instead of training a model from scratch, with transfer learning you make use of models that are trained on another machine learning task. The pre-trained network captures generic knowledge about the domain during pre-training and will only be 'fine-tuned' to the specifics of your dataset.

Reviewer: I would remove the 'domain' reference for its ambiguity; it could refer to both the generic domain but also to the domain of your specific dataset.

```suggestion
Instead of training a model from scratch, with transfer learning you make use of models that are trained on another machine learning task. The pre-trained network captures generic knowledge during pre-training and will only be 'fine-tuned' to the specifics of your dataset.
```

Author: Good point! Totally agree.

An example: Let's say that you want to train a model to classify images of different dog breeds. You could make use of a pre-trained network that learned how to classify images of dogs and cats. The pre-trained network will not know anything about different dog breeds, but it will have captured some general knowledge of, on a high-level, what dogs look like, and on a low-level all the different features (eyes, ears, paws, fur) that make up an image of a dog. Further training this model on your dog breed dataset is a much easier task than training from scratch, because the model can use the general knowledge captured in the pre-trained network.

> In this episode we will learn how use Keras to apply a state-of-the-art pre-trained model to the dollarstreet-10 dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this episode we will learn how use Keras to adapt a state-of-the-art pre-trained model to the dollarstreet-10 dataset.
```

> In this episode we will learn how use Keras to apply a state-of-the-art pre-trained model to the dollarstreet-10 dataset.

Reviewer: I couldn't find a reference to the `-10` anywhere, have I missed it? Otherwise, I would propose to stick with the exact spelling to prevent confusions, including word splitting and capitalisation.

Also, how about adding a link to the dataset?

```suggestion
In this episode we will learn how use Keras to apply a state-of-the-art pre-trained model to the [Dollar Street Dataset](https://mlcommons.org/datasets/dollar-street/).
```

Author: Good point! You couldn't find it, because it is a dataset that I made myself. But I will call it Dollar Street Dataset, but link to https://zenodo.org/records/10970014 instead of the mlcommons dataset from which it is derived.

## 1. Formulate / Outline the problem and 2. Identify inputs and outputs

> Just like in the previous episode, we use the dollar street 10 dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like in the previous episode, we use the Dollar Street Dataset. 
```

```python
import pathlib
import numpy as np

DATA_FOLDER = pathlib.Path('data/dataset_dollarstreet/') # change to location where you stored the data
train_images = np.load(DATA_FOLDER / 'train_images.npy')
val_images = np.load(DATA_FOLDER / 'test_images.npy')
train_labels = np.load(DATA_FOLDER / 'train_labels.npy')
val_labels = np.load(DATA_FOLDER / 'test_labels.npy')
```

## 3. Prepare the data
We prepare the data as before, scaling the values between 0 and 1.
```python
train_images = train_images / 255.0
val_images = val_images / 255.0
```

## 4. Choose a pre-trained model or start building architecture from scratch
Let's define our model input layer using the shape of our training images:
```python
# input tensor
inputs = keras.Input(train_images.shape[1:])
```

Our images are 64 x 64 pixels, whereas the pre-trained model that we will use was 
trained on images of 160 x 160 pixels. To deal with this, we add an upscale layer
that resizes the images to 160 x 160 pixels during training and prediction.
```python
# upscale layer
method = tf.image.ResizeMethod.BILINEAR
upscale = keras.layers.Lambda(
  lambda x: tf.image.resize_with_pad(x, 160, 160, method=method))(inputs)
```

> From the `keras.applications` module we use the `DenseNet121` architecture. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the `DenseNet121` architecture from the `keras.applications` module. 
```

This architecture was proposed by the paper: [Densely Connected Convolutional Networks (CVPR 2017)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.06993). It is trained on the [Imagenet](https://www.image-net.org/) dataset, which contains 14,197,122 annotated images according to the WordNet hierarchy with over 20,000 classes.

We will have a look at the architecture later, for now it is enough to know

> that it is a convolutional neural network with 121 layers that was designed 

Reviewer: I wonder: is it the large amount of data or the large number of parameter that leads to the improved accuracy? Or: is it really the transfer learning aspect that gives the boost?
My guess is that it is both, but I think that we should have a more specific answer.

By setting `weights='imagenet'` we use the weights that resulted from training
this network on the Imagenet data.

We connect the network to the `upscale` layer that we defined before.

### Only train a 'head' network
Instead of fine-tuning all the weights of the DenseNet121 network using our dataset,
we choose to freeze all these weights and only train a so-called 'head network' 
that sits on top of the pre-trained network. You can see the DenseNet121 network
as extracting a meaningful feature representation from our image. The head network
will then be trained to decide on which of the 10 dollarstreet classes the image belongs.

We will turn of the `trainable` property of the base model:
```python
base_model.trainable = False
```

Let's define our 'head' network:
```python
out = base_model.output
out = keras.layers.Flatten()(out)
out = keras.layers.BatchNormalization()(out)
out = keras.layers.Dense(128, activation='relu')(out)
out = keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(out)
out = keras.layers.BatchNormalization()(out)
out = keras.layers.Dense(64, activation='relu')(out)
out = keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(out)

> out = keras.layers.Dense(10)(out)

Reviewer: Not really important, but the same hyper-parameters (layers, layer sizes, dropout rates) as in the previous section for consistency might prevent confusion here.

Author: Good point, also it is overly complex.

I now use:
```python
out = base_model.output
out = keras.layers.Flatten()(out)
out = keras.layers.BatchNormalization()(out)
out = keras.layers.Dense(50, activation='relu')(out)
out = keras.layers.Dropout(0.5)(out)
out = keras.layers.Dense(10)(out)
```

### 3. Max pooling
The `max_pool` layer right before the `flatten` layer is added because we provided `pooling='max'`.
::::
:::

::: challenge
## Training and evaluating the pre-trained model

### 1. Compile the model
Compile the model:
- Use the `adam` optimizer 
- Use the `SparseCategoricalCrossentropy` loss with `from_logits=True`. 
- Use 'accuracy' as a metric.

### 2. Train the model
Train the model on the training dataset:
- Use a batch size of 32
- Train for 30 epochs, but use an earlystopper with a patience of 5
- Pass the validation dataset as validation data so we can monitor performance on the validation data during training
- Store the result of training in a variable called `history`
- Training can take a while, it is a much larger model than what we have seen so far.

### 3. Inspect the results
Plot the training history and evaluate the trained model. What do you think of the results?

:::: solution
## Solution

### 1. Compile the model
```python
model.compile(optimizer='adam',
              loss=keras.losses.SparseCategoricalCrossentropy(from_logits=True),
              metrics=['accuracy'])
```

### 2. Train the model
Define the early stopper:
```python

> keras.callbacks.EarlyStopping(monitor='val_accuracy',

Reviewer: I understand you need to store the `EarlyStopping` object in a variable to use it in the next step.

```suggestion
early_stopper = keras.callbacks.EarlyStopping(monitor='val_accuracy',
```

Author: Whoops!

```

### 3. Inspect the results
```python
def plot_history(history, metrics):
    """
    Plot the training history

    Args:
        history (keras History object that is returned by model.fit())
        metrics(str, list): Metric or a list of metrics to plot
    """
    history_df = pd.DataFrame.from_dict(history.history)
    sns.lineplot(data=history_df[metrics])
    plt.xlabel("epochs")
    plt.ylabel("metric")

plot_history(history, ['accuracy', 'val_accuracy'])
```
![](fig/05_training_history_transfer_learning.png){alt='Training history for training the pre-trained-model. The training accuracy slowly raises from 0.1 to 0.8 in 20 epochs. The validation accuracy starts higher at 0.25, but reaches a plateau around 0.6'}
The final validation accuracy reaches 63%, this is a huge improvement over 30% accuracy we reached with the simple convolutional neural network that we build from scratch in the previous episode.

### 4. (Optional) Try out other pre-trained neural networks
Train and evaluate another pre-trained model from https://keras.io/api/applications/. How does it compare to DenseNet121?

::::
:::

## Concluding: The power of transfer learning

> In many domains large networks pre-trained on vast amounts of data are available, such as in computer vision and natural language processing. Using transfer learning you can benefit from the knowledge stored in a pre-trained network that was captured from another machine learning task. In many fields transfer learning will outperform models trained from scratch, especially if your dataset is small or of poor quality.

Reviewer: Minor stylistic changes to shorten the sentences a bit:

```suggestion
In many domains, large networks are available that have been trained on vast amounts of data, such as in computer vision and natural language processing. Using transfer learning, you can benefit from the knowledge that was captured from another machine learning task. In many fields, transfer learning will outperform models trained from scratch, especially if your dataset is small or of poor quality.
```

::: keypoints

> - Large pre-trained capture generic knowledge about a domain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Large pre-trained models capture generic knowledge about a domain
```

> - Use the `keras.applications` module to easily use pre-trained models on your own datasets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use the `keras.applications` module to easily use pre-trained models for your own datasets
```
